docs(kv-ir): Explain support for auto-generated KV pairs. (#888)
y-scope/clp: docs/src/dev-guide/design-kv-ir-streams/auto-gen-kv-pairs.md

# Auto-generated KV pairs

One of the key differences between KV-IR streams and a format like [JSON lines][json-lines] is that
KV-IR streams support storing KV pairs generated by the logging framework separately from those
generated by the user. For instance, consider the structured [Zap] log printing statement (LPS) in
[Figure 1](#figure-1) and its output, as JSON, in [Figure 2](#figure-2). Comparing the user-defined
KV pairs in [Figure 1](#figure-1) and the output in [Figure 2](#figure-2), we can see that the

> logging library added the timestamp and level KV pairs automatically. (The key for the message,
> timestamp, and log level are Zap configuration options.) Storing these two categories of KV pairs in
> a format like JSON has the disadvantage that both categories share the same key namespace; so a user
> needs to pick keys that don't conflict with the logging library's keys, and the logging library
> needs to pick keys that are unlikely to conflict with a user's keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
logging library added the timestamp and level KV pairs automatically.

Although the keys for the message, timestamp, and log level can be configured via Zap options,
storing these two categories of KV pairs in a format like JSON requires additional effort to prevent
keys conflicts, since both categories share the same key namespace:

* Users must avoid selecting keys that might conflict with those used by the logging framework—-this
  may even require knowledge of all reserved keys.
* The logging library must choose keys that are unlikely to collide with user-defined keys, and
  still implement a policy to resolve any conflicts that do occur.
```
* Add a little more details to explain why this is really a headache and inevitable.
* How about using `users` instead `a user`? Feel like it's easier to read.

(figure-1)=
:::{card}

```go
logger.Info("Task completed successfully.",
  zap.String("task", task_id),
  zap.Int("pending_tasks", 2),
)
```

+++
**Figure 1**: An example structured LPS.
:::

(figure-2)=
:::{card}

```json
{
  "ts":1708161000.123456,
  "level": "info",
  "message": "Task completed successfully.",
  "task": "task_1",
  "pending_tasks": 2
}
```

+++
**Figure 2**: The JSON output of the LPS in [Figure 1](#figure-1).
:::

We define the two categories of KV pairs as follows:

1. *auto-generated* KV pairs: those inserted automatically by a logging framework.
2. *user-generated* KV pairs: user-defined KV pairs inserted explicitly by the user.

In [Figure 2](#figure-2), we categorize the timestamp and level KV pairs as auto-generated. (Even
though the user's logging statement determines the value of the log-level kv-pair, the user doesn't
explicitly insert it into the log event as a kv-pair.)

As we'll see below, storing auto-generated and user-generated KV pairs requires a more advanced
query syntax, but also has a few additional benefits.

## Querying auto-generated KV pairs

> Since KV-IR streams store auto-generated KV pairs and user-generated KV pairs in different
> namespaces, we differentiate which namespace to query using special query syntax. For instance, if a
> log event has both an auto-generated KV pair and user-generated KV pair with the key `timestamp`, we
> need some way to allow the user to query one of the two. We could use two different queries, one to
> query each namespace, but this wouldn't allow users to join filters from both namespaces. Instead,
> we use the key-prefix `@` to denote a filter on an auto-generated KV pair---e.g., `@timestamp: 0`
> denotes a filter for an auto-generated KV pair with the key `timestamp` and value `0`. Accordingly,
> filters on user-generated KV pairs whose keys start with the character `@` will need to escape the
> `@` symbol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a log event has both an auto-generated KV pair and user-generated KV pair with the same key,
e.g., `timestamp`, we need a mechanism to let the user query one or the other unambiguously.
Naively, we could use two different queries, one to query each namespace, but this wouldn't allow
users to join filters from both namespaces, and it would double the query evaluation workload. As a
solution, we introduce a special query syntax to differentiate the queried namespace: we use the
key-prefix `@` to denote a filter on an auto-generated KV pair---e.g., `@timestamp: 0` denotes a
filter for an auto-generated KV pair with the key `timestamp` and value `0`. Accordingly, filters on
user-generated KV pairs whose keys start with the character `@` will need to escape the
`@` symbol.
```
Reordered the flow a little bit as: <what we need (with an example)> -> <why the naive solution doesn't work> -> <what is the new syntax we provide>. What do u think?

## Additional benefits

One benefit of supporting auto-generated KV pairs is that our CLP logging libraries or plugins can
use a consistent set of keys for auto-generated KV pairs, making it easier for users to filter for
those keys. For instance, if a user is logging in both Java and Python, and they use CLP logging

> plugins to generate KV-IR streams, the streams generated should both use the same key for log

Reviewer: ```suggestion
plugins to generate KV-IR streams, the generated streams should both use the same key for log
```
Should sound more natural?
